[MUSIC PLAYING]
Cynthia James was
on the fast track
as an actress, singer, and
wife of a high profile actor.
But what no one but her
closest friends and family knew
was that she suffered
horribly from emotional trauma
and a lack of self-confidence.
While this is not an
uncommon story in itself
the twist comes when
Cynthia took responsibility
for her healing as a warrior.
Her journey of healing
resulted in becoming
an inspirational
author and lecturer
who has the grace and presence
to take this message deep.
She joins us today to speak
about how we can reveal
the very best of ourselves.
And Cynthia, it's
wonderful to see you again.
It's wonderful to see you
and to be with you again.
And to have moments to connect.
-Yes.
And we had a little
bit of time off camera.
And last time I saw
you was in Sedona.
And we had a
magnificent conversation
about the previous book
that you had written to what
you're working on right now.
And I really wanted to go
back into that conversation
because it's a very personal
and sometimes painful story.
But it gives other
people who have been
through these
experiences something
that they can really kind
of hold on to and relate to.
And I would appreciate it if you
would start by kind of giving
us a little of the
background of your life
as the world saw it, which
was very big and very shiny.
Let's talk about
what your life was
like before we go into what was
going on underneath that story.
Yeah.
Well I was married
to a famous actor.
We had a beautiful
home in Malibu.
Our children went
to the best schools.
We traveled all over the world.
It was really incredible.
I was making my living
as an actress as well.
And so you know, I was
living the dream life.
Talk about your life as
an actress a little bit.
Yeah.
I was the original Lexie
on Days of our Lives.
And so it was great
because I love theater.
And you know soap operas
really are theater.
You're doing everything kind of
live, and quick, and wonderful.
And so that was great.
I'd go home, I'd
be with the family.
And so I felt on a
certain level as though I
had moved out of my
history and created
this extraordinary life.
And so it was surprising
to me that these things
kept coming up.
These feelings, and these
emotions, and these behaviors
kept coming up in
unexpected ways.
And you try to manage them/
you try to push them down.
You try to deal with them.
But I became aware that it
was time for me to really look
at them because I couldn't mask
what was happening any longer.
Right.
And you know it's
interesting because we
often hear this
story about people
who are living "the big life."
And oftentimes we read
about them in the headlines
because they end up
in either arrest--
developing an arrest record
or in rehab or something.
But with you, you
had the presence
and you had the
courage to begin diving
into the deep end of that well.
And let's talk about
how deep that well went.
Because I'm speaking about
coming from a lineage of women
that goes back at least
five generations of abuse.
And so let's begin
at whatever you
feel is the appropriate
point in that story.
And certainly going back to
your grandmother at least.
So we can see and think
of it in our own light
how these things-- how
these patterns reoccur.
You know I'd love
to talk about this.
My grandmother was born in 1898.
Her name was Mary Swain,
and she died at 99.
She raised four children
in Alabama on a farm.
At a time when--
and she was alone--
and it was a time when
black people in this country
were really challenged.
You know In the way in which
she took care of her children
was taking her clothes--
going to pick up
the clothes of the Caucasians
in the neighborhood,
and taking it back
home and washing it,
and having her kids help
iron, and then take them back.
So that she could take
care of her children,
that they could get educated.
And then she moved to
Minnesota, bought a home,
and created this life for the
family that was possibilities.
The challenge with
all of that though
is that while the
children-- my grandfather
was there before he left--
there was a great deal of abuse.
And my mother, who was
incredibly beautiful.
I mean she was like--
-Like you,
Oh thank you.
I mean she was like a Rita
Hayworth she was so amazing.
And intelligent and skilled.
But my grandfather treated
her terribly because she
was very intuitive as well.
And so there were experiences
I think that were mystical.
And he didn't want
her to have those.
And so he would lock her
in under the house in
those hot boxes that they had.
Lock her under?
How do you even do that?
How do you get
someone in the box?
Well you squeeze them in.
And so she was always
paranoid and always
feeling disconnected.
And when I started uncovering
all of this in my family
and started to recognize
what was going on with me
I did research.
I went to the University
of Santa Monica
and we had to do a genogram.
Five generations of
women had been abused,
raped, traumatized.
Did that happen to-- was
it your great grandmother?
It was my great
grandmother who was a slave,
brought over as a slave.
And the slave owner
raped her in front
of the entire slave group.
And she conceived.
And so she hated her child.
And so that continued the
abuse on another level.
And so it was very-- it was
very disheartening on one level
to find out that it had
been going on for so long.
But there was this kernel
within me that said,
well maybe I can shift it.
Because my stepfather
was the perpetrator.
My mother married for the
second time to get out.
Because my biological
father left pretty early,
he was an alcoholic.
And so she married this man
who beat her consistently.
Did you witness the beatings?
Oh, totally.
-That's very difficult.
-Very.
I remember being about six years
old and hearing her scream.
She was pregnant with my
brother and going into the room,
and he was straddling
her, smacking her.
And she's screaming get out.
Because she wanted
me to be safe.
-Telling you to get out?
-Yeah.
Telling me to get out.
Yeah.
And so I was mouthy
and expressive.
And so that probably did not
help the relationship with him.
And this went on-- I
was six years old--
this went on for almost a year.
Until at some point
something in her
said I can't do this anymore.
And she had my uncle
come and take everything
that she owned in sheets.
And she got out because she
only had a 20 minute window
before my stepfather came back.
And so it was-- I didn't
remember all this until I was
in my 30s and I was in therapy.
And I was really
trying to find out
why I was disconnected
at points and I
would disassociate at points.
And so it was really quite
interesting for me to say,
oh, this is why.
To open to it.
There was a therapist
at one point who
said quite innocently,
have you ever
been abused by your father?
At which time I fell out of
the chair on the floor and was
curled up.
And that opened up the
door for me to look at it.
But had you not had memory
of it up to that point?
You had shut it out.
You must have compartmentalised
your emotions in mind
to the extent because
you couldn't bear
it-- to even think about it.
You must have just pushed
it to the back of the mind.
Yeah.
I think really what happens
is you fight, flight,
or you leave.
And I dissociated.
I think I just pulled
myself out of my body.
And I remember being
in therapy and there
was something going
on and the therapist
said to me, where are you?
And I was aware
that a part of me
was kind of hanging up
on the ceiling watching,
that I had left my body.
And so part of the work was
to get me back into my body
so I could feel.
-Oh.
So now during these
experiences that you endured
with your stepfather
were you out of body
during those experiences?
I must have been.
I had-- there were little
memories that came back.
And I was so grateful
my mother was alive.
Because you know the remembering
of those kinds of things,
there's a lot of controversy
about whether it happened
and whether the therapist
implanted stuff.
But when I went
back to my mother
and I started describing
these memories
and these little flashes
she began to weep.
Because she thought
I wouldn't remember
because I was so young.
-Oh.
How old were you?
I was six.
You were six.
And so we're talking pretty
extreme abuse I take it?
Right.
It was pretty extreme.
Pretty extreme.
And so as you're working
with this therapist and this
is being revealed from
you to your conscious mind
for its understanding.
What was your very-- you say
you were in a fetal position
on the floor-- what was
your first response?
Because we want to talk
about the lineage of what
happens once you're
confronted with this
if it has been
erased essentially
from your conscious awareness.
You know I remember
the therapist getting
on the floor with me and
basically kind of holding me
and telling me I was safe.
And asking me what was going on.
And I wasn't totally
clear but I was
aware something happened to me.
And so that became the work.
To uncover it so that I could
be safe enough not to leave.
Because I think that
at six years old
your only option is to try
to run away on some level.
Right.
And so you had run away
on an emotional level.
So once the memory
is fully back you
had to start working
with this, which there
are a lot of implications.
I mean there's anger, there's
mistrust, all these things.
Well first of all, tell us how
those things were reflecting
in your adult relationships.
I mean we can--
A mess.
Ha ha.
You know really I tell
people that I really--
it was a path of discovery.
A relationship was a
path of discovery for me.
And I just kept repeating
the same relationships
over and over.
Different people in
different bodies.
Because I couldn't understand.
I was this loving,
connected person
and yet when people would
get close to me everything
would shut down.
Because really
what it was saying
was that I couldn't trust love.
Yes.
And I remember in our last
conversation one thing
you shared with me
was that when it came
to personal
relationships-- and we're
talking about California and
eras where free love existed.
Where people could hook
up with one another.
And it was OK when
you first met a man,
before you really knew him.
You know when you were
first getting together.
That was OK because
there wasn't any really
deep intimacy there yet.
-Right.
Right.
Exactly.
But what happened
when someone wanted
to get a little closer to you?
And a lot of people
can relate to this.
Everything shut down.
I, I-- my sexuality,
my ability to connect,
my ability to communicate.
And these protectors,
these huge protectors
went up because it
was just too scary.
You know what if I'd have to go
back to that original trauma.
That wasn't a conscious
thought but that's what
was running in the background.
So when we talk about
the partners that
came into your life you say--
and in your previous book
you talk about this--
that we keep creating
these same fields of resonance.
We keep being drawn back
to what is familiar to us.
No matter how unhealthy it
is, it's familiar until we
actually break the pattern.
Would you say that in the
subsequent relationships
throughout your adult life-- was
it abusive patterns with men?
Or was it simply that you were
shutting down and creating
the issues for yourself?
Or a combination of both?
It was both.
People who were alcoholics,
who were drug addicts, who
are cheaters, who had multiple
relationships besides me,
and all of that was going on.
And the ability-- it was
like I could chase them.
But when they'd turn around
and it would be like,
OK, now I want you.
It was like, OK, too scary.
Too scary.
So you could never get
very far with it really?
-Couldn't get far with it.
-But you did.
You got far enough
where you had a family.
And you had a very
shiny looking life.
Right.
Well because you know what--
-- this is what I discovered
in all the work
that I did, is that
when you've been
abused you get really
good at being a chameleon.
You get really good at
being what the people
that you're with want.
So what they drink, you drink.
If they smoke, you smoke.
If they like this,
you like this.
And so I really
became a chameleon.
But the thing is
is that the essence
of who I am, the
authenticity of who I am,
would start to come up.
And when that would
start to come up that
would tweak the people.
Because this isn't the
person that I connected with.
This isn't the person
that I engaged with.
Where is she?
And then I couldn't
push it back down.
And so there would
be this conflict,
internal and external.
Yes.
And then I would assume that
in this-- what you're saying
is not only were you a
chameleon but a part of you
becomes a pleaser.
Completely.
Do anything to have love.
Do anything so that
people won't leave you.
Do anything so
that you don't have
to be alone to
deal with this pain
that is coursing through you.
That's a big one.
And now as I'm listening
to you on this,
you went through some rather
extreme types of abuse.
Most people that are
watching this were raised
in-- most households
were just not conscious
as to what we know now.
I mean so much has
bubbled to the surface
in the last few decades as to
how vulnerable little children
are to their environment.
To do the things you say and
do to them that our parents
didn't know about.
In their generation it
was basically children
should be seen and not heard.
They didn't let
them have any voice.
And to put them
out on the street
or to give them a good
slap was just considered
a normal means of discipline.
So coming into--
you know-- coming
into this way of
consciousness now,
would you say that most people
that are watching this also
went through their
own form of this kind
of disrespectful treatment
on one level or another?
Do you find that with most
of the people you meet,
man and woman?
Totally.
I do coaching with people and I
was with a couple this morning.
And the man came from
this really wonderful
successful family and yet a
father that was disconnected,
that didn't know
how to show love.
And a mother that had these
high expectations and there
were punishment when
that didn't work.
And people don't realize
that when love is withheld
from them, when
they're not seen,
or when they're not
recognized, when
they don't have a voice in their
growing up, it has an impact.
And they start to
create an identity based
on what will make them safe.
Based on who they're
going to be in the world.
And feel like
someone can see them.
And they're going to
control the situation.
Right .
Yeah, all external stuff.
Right.
All external.
It's not actually
fixing and creating
that being from within,
but from kind of pasting
a business card on the outside.
Ha ha.
Exactly.
And so one of the things
you also have said before
is that you were given
many opportunities
along the way to
pull yourself out
of the patterns you were in.
Can you talk about
that a little bit?
Yeah.
You know I'm a blessed person.
It was like there were angels
around me that would show up
as teachers, that would
show up as-- I mean
I had Mrs. Milky
and Mr. Benson where
my elementary school teachers.
And I was a mess.
And I was angry.
And nobody could figure
out why because I
had all this these
gifts, and this talent,
and this intelligence.
And yet there would
be these outbursts.
And these two teachers saw me.
I mean they saw me,
they understood me,
they encouraged my creativity.
And I felt so loved.
And so what I think that
did was plant within me
the seed of possibility
that that exists.
And so along the way there were
mentors, there were teachers.
People who said, come over
here, let me help you.
I mean there was
a woman who said,
you know you have this
wonderful energy and charisma,
you should be a model.
And so-- took me into
a department store
and I became a model while
I was in high school.
Someone saw me and that
I had this gift of gab
and I became part of the
debate team, and chess.
So even though there was
all this craziness going
on in different places in
my life there were people
who were saying, I see you.
Come over here and let me
help you share your gifts
and shine your light.
So you're starting to get
little touchstones here
of where your talents and
your gifts in life were.
But as your relationships
on the outside
progressed you
were still falling
back into the same patterns.
Well, yeah.
But you know the older you
get, the more sophisticated
you get at it.
So what's that mean?
Well, it means that you
learn to cover up those things
that you perceive as flaws.
And I learned what not to say.
How to act with certain
groups of people.
How to show up.
How to dress.
How to bring my talents in.
But not to show them
what I was feeling.
Not to talk about the pain
that was going on internally.
And to suppress my own voice
if it meant in any way, shape,
or form, there was danger.
And when I hear you say that, I
think about-- this is something
I've thought about quite a
bit-- when we watch films,
for example, or we
read books, the moment
that people feel the most
connected with the character
is when they're at their
own most vulnerable.
Absolutely.
When someone is able to reveal
what they've been going through
and how they feel.
And that opens up our hearts
like blossoms to them.
And yet that's the very thing
that we're so afraid to allow
anybody else to see.
-Well, yeah.
Because that vulnerability
makes you naked.
But that nakedness-- I mean
it appears over and over.
I mean through art
up to real life
That's the very thing that is
the beginning of the healing,
isn't it?
-Well, totally.
Because really in the depths
of the pain is the healing.
And I really think that all
of these things that we go
through, and all these
experiences and the awakenings
that we have, are to bring
us to a point of healing
and the health and wellness.
But but being vulnerable like
that is really-- if you don't
know what to do with
the vulnerability,
and if you don't think that
there is safety in the world,
then you want to cover it
up as soon as possible.
Because you're
terrified that that pain
will come back in a way that's
unexpected and brutal maybe.
Yeah.
And that maybe you can't manage.
You've learned how to
manage it and contain it up
to that point.
There was a woman who
ultimately came into your life
and was really able to
help you open up to this
and move through.
Can you talk a little bit
about that experience?
There was a woman
who-- who said,
you do not have
to live this way.
-That's the lady.
-Yeah.
You don't have to live this way.
You don't have to
sell yourself out.
You don't have to give
yourself away to be loved.
But for some
reason you actually
heard the message that time.
It's can't be the first
time you've heard it.
Well, because she loved me.
I see.
She loved me and didn't
want anything from me.
Wasn't trying to mold
me or control me.
She just wanted me to wake up.
And it was with
such love and heart.
And this is a thing
we've witnessed
in so many other people's
lives, all of us have.
Where we've seen someone who's
really struggling in life.
Who is sabotaging their lives.
Who's putting up
with things they
should not be putting up with.
And you can't help them.
You can-- another person
may have said that to you.
You may have had people saying
it to you every other week.
But until something in you
could trust that that was true,
and you were ready to hear
the message, we can't hear it.
That's the frustrating part.
We want to go around fixing--
trying to fix ourselves.
We're going around try to
fix each other all the time.
Well, if you just did this-- and
giving her a big fat opinion.
But the reality is you
can't tell anybody else.
-No.
-Until it's time.
You can't do anything.
-Nope.
And the thing is is
that I do believe
that sometimes those people
telling us those things
plant seeds within us.
And then somebody shows up
and puts the right water on it
and it blossoms.
But the thing is is
that when you look
at any kind of addiction, any
kind of challenges in people's
lives, until they
want to change nothing
is going to make them change.
You know I went to Al Anon
because of my father's
alcoholism and stuff.
And it's like, you
can't hide the alcohol.
You can't talk him out of it.
You can't manipulate
them out of it.
Until they want to change
they're going to just do
what they need to do.
And I think it's true
for every human being.
I agree.
And that's probably the
most frustrating thing
of our personal
relationships with others.
Especially if you're
the kind of person
that really wants to be of
some kind or service or help.
It's not your business
until that person's ready.
Right.
Because you can only
change yourself.
Right.
Exactly.
You can only heal yourself.
And I think sometimes people
try to change other people
because they are afraid if
they change they're going
to-- the relationship will end.
-It did for you.
-Oh.
It totally did.
So tell us what happened
when you started changing.
I mean you're talking
about losses in friendship.
Yeah.
A real breakage because you're
becoming and emerging-- you're
emerging into a
different human being.
Yeah.
My spirituality became
very important to me.
My spiritual practice, my work
with the therapist, my wanting
desperately to get
clear about who I was
and what was going on with me.
And it changed the dance.
It changed the dance
in the relationship.
And he was having
his own challenges.
And so they escalated.
And because I was
becoming clear,
and because I wouldn't go
back into that old behavior,
he didn't know
what to do with it.
And so ultimately he opted
out of the relationship.
And it was challenging
for me and the kids.
But it was really a gift.
Because when I look
back, that relationship
afforded me the
ability and the space
to do really deep inner work.
And even though it was
painful when I got out of it
I got to find out who am I?
How do I want to
be in the world?
How do I want to share my gifts?
You know, who am I if I'm
not in a relationship,
being what somebody else needs?
Who am I?
And that was big.
That's a big one
for women in general.
Oh.
Totally,
I think if there is a gender
divide, that is a really
big one between men and women.
Women so define themselves by
the relationships they're in.
Well.
Yeah.
We're inculturated.
I mean people are giving us
dolls and little cook things
from the time we're little.
You know it was like,
this is what you do.
But for me it was like,
wow , if I stop dating,
if I'm not looking
for Mr. Right,
then who am I and what do I do?
And it it led me back to school.
It opened up new ways
of thinking for me.
It opened up a new
career path for me.
And it really allowed me to
look at my thought patterns
and what I was creating.
And then it also helps
you understand the nature
of your connection with
friends and other people
in you're-- maybe not immediate
family-- but in the environment
around you.
That changes with it.
You're not having the
same conversations
with people anymore.
That's a big one.
I mean I've been through
that where it's, I
don't want to participate
in that level of discussion
anymore.
And friends react very
quickly to know that.
Yeah.
Sometimes they leave.
When you're in the pattern
of-- whatever it is together--
they're not getting
the satisfaction
from the same
relationship anymore.
It's not the same relationship.
-Right.
And you know when
the relationship
ended, when the marriage
ended, some people
just exited all together.
And I really believe that they
created space for the new tribe
to come in.
-Yes.
Yes.
And so I ended up at this
small spiritual community.
And at that point
Michael Bernard Beckwith
was a practitioner there.
-Oh, yes.
OK.
And so a lot of us kind
of migrated into this place
at the same time.
And so we went to
classes together,
we had these deep conversations,
we support each other
through health challenges,
through going to school,
through raising our children.
I mean it was powerful.
One of the things that
you had to deal with--
and you talk about at great
length, including in you're
working with other people--
is the body has its own memory
of anything we're experiencing.
And it doesn't have
to be physical abuse.
But where you have
physical abuse
it may be even more pronounced.
-It's encoded.
Yeah,
What I discovered is that
in the five generations
there were distinct things that
kept showing up each generation
that were in the body.
And so the majority of
the women in my family
died with illnesses, overweight,
emotional challenges, that
showed up in very similar ways.
And so that caused
me to look at, well,
what is it that is in the
body that is transmitting
information and has
created neural paths
that don't support me?
And so I started doing
a lot of research
and a lot of working on my
body to open up energies.
I hired a trainer
whose expertise
was emotional challenges.
And so the person what
would-- as I was working out--
would be witnessing parts of
the body that were constricting
and stuff.
And we'd go into those places.
And I remember one time
laying on the bench
and I'm lifting the weights,
and all of a sudden I
literally felt my
stepfather on top of me.
And he said, do
not run from that.
The trainer said that?
The trainer said, do not run
from that-- as I'm pushing
this weight and sobbing.
And eventually there was
this release in my body.
And I went home and
I got in the shower
and as the water was hitting me
I realized I was feeling water
on my body for the first time.
Interesting.
Very interesting.
But there was a dance
at another point?
Is it at that point
or another point?
I think it was another
point when you were working
with someone where
your stepfather came
through from the other side.
Yes.
It was a woman who was a
healer and a body worker.
And she was doing a massage
on me and she stopped.
And she said, someone
is coming through
and wants to speak to you.
And I immediately saw the
image of my stepfather
in the suit with the hat.
And right after I saw the
image she said, he's in a suit
and he's got a hat.
And I was like, yeah.
And she said he wants
to speak to you.
And I was flitting between
intrigue and anger.
-Right.
-That he was in my space.
Right.
And so I said OK.
And this is what he said to me.
He said, you have been
dragging me around
and I need you to have the
angels cut the cord between us
so that we can both be free.
And it was-- I mean I fee
a little emotional about it
because it was so
stunningly true.
That I had been dragging
him through my whole life
with the anger, and the
judgments, and the resentments,
and the shame.
And we were still connected
because I wouldn't let it go.
And we don't stop
and think about that.
Did part of you resent the
fact that he was asking
you to do this
because you didn't
want to maybe do that for him?
Totally.
OK.
Talk about it.
Totally.
Because a lot of us have
these things with the deceased,
on many levels.
-Well.
Yeah.
I mean it was like he
didn't deserve to be free.
I mean I wanted him to be
in punishment and upset
and you know.
And yet a part of me knew that
when we passed the other side
you know we're not in
some place called Hell.
I mean you know that there's
a freedom of the soul.
But it was so striking.
Because really I felt like
once I got past the saying,
you know he doesn't
deserve this, it was like,
this is about my freedom.
-Right.
If I don't cut this cord,
if I don't let him go,
I will drag him into
every relationship,
every aspect of my life.
-Which you had been.
-Right.
So what happened
after this moment?
I made a decision.
I was doing a one woman
show about my life.
And the cutting of the cord
became the end of the play.
And I did it all
over the country.
And it was incredible.
Each time I did it the
cutting of that golden cord
was like a freeing of my body.
And people would stay in
the theater after the play
and want to have
discussions about it
because they wanted to know
how they could do that.
Because it was so hard
to let go of the anger,
and the resentment, and
the pain that had been
put upon them by these people.
Well let's talk about that.
Because people listening
right now may want to know,
how can I do that when I
am so angry at this person?
So how would you
recommend a person
begin the process
of cutting the cord
when you're still ticked off?
When you're still hurt.
It was actually the
first chapter of the book
in What Will Set You Free.
I have people write the story
in all the gory details.
Write it.
Get it out.
And then to look
at the possibility,
what would my life be like if
this story wasn't running me?
If this wasn't how I
was identifying myself.
If this isn't how I
was looking at myself.
What would my life look like?
And that one little question
opens up with people.
Because they-- well,
I'd be happier.
I could have healthier
relationships.
I wouldn't be dominated by
all of these insecurities
and these feelings
of lack of worth.
And I would be able
to find out what
it is in me that's important.
What it is in me that makes
me essential to this planet.
And so that's the first thing.
And then the second
thing is to support
people in finding their voice.
Because most people who
have been-- whether it's
beaten, or sexually abused, or
just emotionally traumatized--
they have shut down their voice.
And one of the reasons that you
know that is that when you get
ready to have a conversation
that's uncomfortable,
you're throat chakra
will constrict.
Yes.
And it will hurt.
And your jaws will get tight.
And the back of your
head will constrict.
And those are all signs
that you have lost
your ability to use your voice.
And so you're essentially
saying that a person is
given this golden opportunity.
Once you can find it for
your own self-interest,
even not necessarily even
to release the other person
at this point, if
you can find it
in yourself to go
through this process
you get a chance
rewrite the script.
Absolutely.
And get rid of the shame and
the guilt, which is toxic.
To move into states of
forgiveness and choose.
Because you start to realize
that your life is about choice.
That every moment is a choice.
And that these experiences are
just energy and information
and that you don't
have to claim them.
It doesn't belong to you.
And that you can say, well
what does belong to me?
How do I want to show up?
And do I really want
to walk through my life
with this level of pain attached
to me as though it's a weight?
And do you want to label
yourself in that way?
Exactly.
Even the words themselves
have a lot of power and import
in terms of what we
become in our adult lives
and throughout our lives.
Do you want to label
yourself in that way?
That's one thing I'm
really clear about.
When I hear people
talking about their lives
as victims of this, that,
and the other thing--
not a good place to come from.
I mean after all of this do
you believe in victim-hood?
Well.
You know what, I mean I know
it exists energetically.
But you know I talk to
people about this path
of chaos and unrest.
That an event happens and you
make a decision-- mentally,
emotionally, consciously,
unconsciously-- you
make a decision.
And then your whole
psyche starts looking
for proof that you're right.
And so it goes out and it starts
to create and recreate itself
until you can get to a place
where you understand that it's
all made up in your mind.
That you know when a lot of the
scientists talk about the fact
that they drop these
chemicals and attach
the feelings in all that, that
your mind is mastering you.
As opposed to you choosing
how you want to live.
And how you want to show up.
And how you want to
express in this world.
That you are not a victim
of anything or anyone.
You get to say how
you want to live.
And if people can't
accept it and love you
the way that you
are, authentically,
then they don't belong there.
Absolutely.
Well this obviously
leads to forgiveness,
the subject of forgiveness.
And everybody has a different
take on what that word means.
I have my own take on
what that word means
and diffusing that subject.
How do you-- how do you
view the word forgiveness?
And the actual act?
Well, you know everything is
viewed from my point of view
through perception,
through filters.
And so whenever
you've made a decision
you judge everything
through those filters.
And so forgiveness is really
forgiveness of us, of self.
Letting go of those perceptions
that do not support your health
and your well being.
And then deciding to choose
what you are calling in.
I'm choosing love.
I'm choosing peace.
And so you-- first
of all, I don't
believe that spiritually
people have to be forgiven.
I think the universe loves us
wherever we are in the process.
But I think that
forgiveness is for letting
go of any perception that you
didn't deserve to be loved,
or had, or that someone
had power over you.
And that was a big one.
Because to let go of the fact
that my stepfather controlled
my life, and that I was allowing
him to do it well into my 30s,
was eye opening.
I was like, well,
if he's not, and I
can let that go,
and step back-- I
got to see all the
places I abused myself.
Over eating, over drinking,
not taking care of myself.
And it was like, oh, so now I'm
doing to me what he did to me.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And I can choose differently.
I can choose to love me.
And in addition, there's
another component to that.
And in my perception, which
is when you start looking more
deeply at the other
person as well,
you usually start
seeing the same patterns
in their own life.
Your father was also subject
to abuse when he was young.
-Yes.
-You're stepfather.
Yeah.
Alcoholism.
Yes.
And the stepfather
had a lot of abuse.
And the thing is that
when I work with people
you find out that there have
been generations of this stuff
that people have carried.
But what I tell people
is, you can stop it today.
You can stop it today.
Just because it came
through five generations,
the buck can stop here.
You can shift yourself and
model for your children
what's possible.
And what I found-- and I
don't totally understand it--
but it shifted going back in
time with my family members.
An aunt who passed
away-- I mean we
had an incredible
conversation where she talked
about something that
had happened to her,
and released it for the
first time in '65 years.
My mother had shifts.
And my relatives have had
shifts because they've
seen the shifts in me.
It has an impact in
your entire environment.
The whole matrix changes.
When one person gets it,
the whole matrix changes.
-Exactly.
-Absolutely.
And that's a power-- that's
a very powerful kind of take
away in this conversation.
And for me to understand.
To simply understand
another person's journey
defuses a lot of the
personal part of it.
It's like OK, yes.
And I have not been through
what you've been through.
So I don't know how I would
feel under those circumstances.
But to the degree that one
can feel like you maybe
ended up on the short end of the
stick in certain circumstances.
I find that if I
can look into them
and see that person
was experiencing
so much pain themselves.
-Completely.
It's not personal.
Really.
It may look personal, they've
got their own problems.
Just work on fixing yourself.
There's no point in blaming.
And I find that if
you can understand
that other person's
journey there's
just no need for forgiveness.
It's really more understanding.
You know forgiveness,
for me, I almost
see it as kind of almost
like a pious thing--
to be able to say, I shall
deem you worthy of forgiveness.
I don't, I don't-- I
don't like that tone.
Well, yeah.
And really do we have a
power anyway to do that?
No.
We don't,
It's really about letting go.
Just letting go.
Understanding.
Understanding your part.
Understanding their part.
Not perpetuating the story.
And kind of getting on
with it to the new level.
And so you've gotten on
with it in many ways.
I mean you've
become really quite
a leader in your community.
And you have this
new book out, which
is called Revealing Your
Extraordinary Essence,
which is really beautiful.
It's a workbook.
-It is.
It's something that
you've put together
as a result of now decades
of unraveling your own story
and helping other people as a
counselor in self-empowerment.
And let's go into that book.
We have some time to do that.
You have it broken
down into very kind
of clear topic headings.
And I've taken out a few
of them here, depending
on how much time we have.
But are you comfortable going
through the book that way?
Totally.
I just want to start--
Tell us your point
of writing it first.
Yeah.
That what if we knew that
the core of our being
was really extraordinary?
That we did not come
here to be uncommon.
That we came here to be
exceptional, and powerful,
dynamic, and mighty.
What if we knew that?
Then we would operate from
a totally different field.
And so that was the
reason for doing the book.
And that people go away
from workshops, or classes,
or experiences, and they
have these great ahas.
And then they get home
and they start drifting
back into those old behaviors.
So I wanted to give them
practical tools that they could
use every day to
keep them centered
in the remembrance
of who they are
and who they came here to be.
And that speaks
to almost everyone.
I mean I can't even tell you how
many different workshops-- more
so conferences and
such I've been to-- I
hear all these
extraordinary things.
But again, you're back
at the end of the day
and you're yourself.
And so you've done a lovely
job with that by the way.
So let's start on
some of the topics
that you find that
are really important.
And the first one we'll
start with is connection.
"Connect."
Yeah.
Being present.
Connect to yourself.
Being present with other people.
I mean I'm sitting here
looking in your eyes
and then were having
this conversation.
And because there's a
connection I feel your heart.
I feel your authenticity.
I feel you looking into my soul.
And so that connection
allows you to be present.
And so you're not thinking about
what happened before, what's
going to happen in the future.
You're really present.
And when you connect,
the heart opens.
And there is this space of
vulnerability and connectivity
that is extraordinary.
And so what you do then is
you cease to worry about what
was before and what's coming.
Because the only thing
is this delicious moment.
And how much of the time are we
ignoring this delicious moment
while we're trying to text,
carry on a conversation,
and drive, and maybe put your
lipstick on at the same time?
Right.
This whole notion
of multitasking
has created not just
short attention spans,
but from-- even though we're
attempting to become more
and more connected through
technology-- that very thing
you're talking about that's
happening right here with you
and me is the thing that's
not happening between people.
There is a huge rise
in social isolation.
Yes.
The statistics are staggering.
That we are withdrawing.
And we are fixating on
these little computers.
And we're doing
all these things.
And we are not
touching one another.
We're not connecting
with one another.
And so it is having an
impact with cardiomyopathy.
It is taking away the
ability to process.
And so stress
hormones are rising
and creating overweight people.
I mean it's-- people
aren't sleeping.
I mean it's huge.
And so I think the
technology is great.
And I love the opportunity that
it's given us, but we cannot
forget that we need each other.
That we need to be
with each other.
That having someone
hold you is a gift.
Absolutely.
I mean even heart
disease in women--
the statistics of heart disease
in women is skyrocketing,
Yes, it is.
And again, I think it has a lot
to do with what you're talking
about, this disconnection.
Because you they
talk about, oh, being
with my friends feeds my heart.
But if you're with your
friends in a superficial way,
or-- like kids texting
each other sitting
next to each other.
Yeah.
Ha ha.
I have grandchildren.
It's like, yeah,
what are you doing?
Yeah.
Exactly.
This thing that happens opens
up the this whole cascade
of chemicals within our being.
Right?
-Exactly.
Exactly.
And--
There is part of our health
and well being-- physically,
mentally, emotionally.
It starts to shut down areas.
And it starts to tell us that
we are not interconnected,
which is why we are seeing
some extraordinary things going
on this planet.
Because people do not
understand that what one does
effects the whole.
Absolutely.
And it's almost to the point
of being phobic about even
looking in each other's eyes.
Exactly.
We don't.
We look away when we're
walking down the street.
You know if someone
smiles we divert our eyes.
It's like, really?
I mean this is another human
being who has the same needs
and desires that you have.
-Right.
So that resonance,
that connection,
that's part of our
path to health.
The next one, it says
is "clear." "Clearing."
And let's talk about
clearing because that
has a couple implications.
Well, you know we like
to do spring cleaning
and we clear everything out.
But you know clearing
really is about energy--
mental, emotional, physical.
We stuff stuff in closets
because nobody can see them.
It's like it doesn't exist.
Except that energy is still
cluttered in that place.
So the clearing is
your willingness
to open up, look at those
places that serve you,
that empower you.
And then looking at
those places that don't.
And being willing to go
into them to clear them out.
Because they're
taking up space that
could be used for your
vitality, for your health,
for your creativity,
for your expression,
and your purpose on the planet.
And taking responsibility.
Once you've cleared
the stuff out
and you've recognized
what you're here to do.
I mean if you get far
enough along in your path
to recognize you're here
for something very specific.
We each have a unique
strength that we're
bringing to this planet.
That requires responsibility.
A huge responsibility.
I mean it's nice
to not know what
you're here to do because
then you don't have to do it.
Right?
I mean I hear this--
Well, yes.
But you know what--
I'm afraid to know what I'm
here to do because-- I've
heard people say this.
Because then it means
I have to change.
Well, yeah.
And I have to let
go of some stuff--
behaviors that don't support
me-- but I feel like them.
Right.
Ha ha.
We're probably all a little
bit familiar with that one.
Yeah.
The next one is-- and I'm
not bringing all of them
up because there are too many--
but the next one is "trust."
This is a huge.
You know trusting other
people, trusting self--
and I'm just going
to say this for me
from a spiritual point
of view-- ultimately
it's about trusting
the universe.
Trusting your
spiritual connection.
That you are careful.
Because when these things
have happened to you,
somehow we relate it to the
fact that we weren't taken care
of by the universe,
by spirit, by God--
whatever you choose to call it.
Right.
And so that that seed of lack
of trust goes into everything.
And how do you start
reprogramming that part?
When you're looking at
someone who is disconnected,
who's blaming the
universe, God-- whatever--
for their circumstance.
To start opening up and
trusting in the fact
that the fabric of the universe
is essentially non-judgement
and love?
It's there for you.
You can build what
you want from it.
You can make it
beautiful or ugly.
You know what, you
start by teaching
them to trust themselves.
By keeping their own
agreements with themselves.
By keeping their word
with other people.
You start small because
the universe is too big.
It's like, OK, I can't
even deal with all of that.
Right.
But most people who
are in those spaces
have a challenge
keeping their word.
Have a challenge
honoring the agreements
that they've made with
themselves and with others.
And so you start there.
So you start learning that
you can trust yourself
and then that becomes
an energetic magnet that
brings in other people and other
experiences that you can trust.
Yes.
And I was very
fortunate because I
was raised by parents that
were-- well, not perfect
because no parents are perfect.
Nor are we as parents
perfect-- one thing they did
was they did tell the truth.
They were very honest people.
And my father just has this
incredible level of integrity.
And I remember, even as a
teenager, one thing he said
to me-- and he said it a couple
times again through life--
he said, honey child--
he's from Texas-- he'd say,
if you're going to lie
do it with someone else,
but don't ever lie to yourself.
And he wasn't suggesting lying.
He was saying one
of the worst sins--
so to speak-- you can create
is to lie to yourself.
That's right.
And how self-delusional
can we be?
And I think that we
are witnessing it all
over this world with certain--
Look at the political
structure alone.
Oh, my goodness.
What do you have to
do, by way of lying
to yourself, to
perpetuate the insanity
that's going on right now?
Keeping us right on
the verge of war.
Or not on the verge of it--
justifying, rationalizing.
We have to convince ourselves,
as the population at large,
that what these people are
convincing their selves of
is true.
So we can justify and
rationalize these things.
This whole thing.
But it shows you the
power of the mind.
Yeah.
And so if they can work
on that end of the spectrum
it can work on the healthy
end of the spectrum.
-Exactly.
-And what you choose.
And how you choose to be.
And what you choose to create.
And how you choose to
live your authentic self.
So no matter how
uncomfortable it
is, even ugly at
times, like daddy says,
don't ever lie to yourself.
Don't lie to yourself.
Right.
Even if you don't have
the tools to change it,
just to recognize the truth I
see that as huge in anyone's
path to healing.
-Yes.
And when you do that
some kind of portals
open and people and
experiences come in to support
you taking the next step.
-Yes.
Recognition of truth.
And having, and then
having-- then you can
start having your
trust in the universe.
Absolutely.
OK "Invest."
Investment of what kind?
-Yeah.
You know a lot of times when
we think of investment we
think of it as financial.
What are we investing
our money in?
But I guess I want to
say to people, what are
you investing your energy in?
What are you investing
your conversation in?
your way of being in?
I mean are you-- are
you putting your love,
your peace, the harmonic
aspects of yourself--
are you investing them?
Or are you perpetuating
that thing that you hate?
Are you are you talking about
these things and these peoples
as enemies, when in fact you
are seeing the same field
that you dislike.
What are you investing in
in your thoughts, words,
deeds, actions and behaviors?
Where you put your
energy is going
to be dictating the quality
of your life experience.
Exactly right.
-"Singing." it says "sing."
-Yes!
And this is near and dear
to you, you're a singer.
I am a singer Well, you know
what-- we all have a song.
We all have a rhythm, and
a rhyme, an end and an
energetic pattern-- and use it.
So whether it's through music,
or whether it's writing,
or whether it's painting,
or raising your children,
or caring for animals--
do it full out.
You know, dance your dance.
Yes.
Well there are many more.
We didn't even get into
"change," and "gratitude,"
and many others.
But again, I mean anyone can
pick up a copy of the book
and start diving in and working
on yourself through the book.
I mean it's a genuine gift to
anyone that's looking to really
break past some
of the old stories
we've been telling ourselves.
Some of the lies we've been
telling ourselves as well.
And the reason I'm
stopping at this point,
even though we have
a few more minutes
is because there's
something else
going on that you're
involved with called
The Global Blessing.
And we have about
five minutes left.
Give us the idea for
the inspiration of it,
what you're hoping to achieve?
And what's going on with that?
I do a lot through
social media.
And I began to
witness the amount
of discomfort, dissatisfaction,
and complaining that goes on.
And I said, you know you're
either part of the solution
or you're a part
of the challenge.
And so I began to
just ask, what is it
that could make a difference?
And it came to me-- blessings.
That we can invite people all
over the world to come and do
blessings and bring
blessings for every aspect
of this planet-- those things
we love and those things
we don't like.
And so I created the
global blessing blog.
And anybody-- my intention
is to have 50,000 people post
blessings from September
22 to December 21,
the end of the Mayan calendar.
And to really put that energy
as a container-- a vortex
of health, and well
being, and love,
and peace-- out into the world.
So we become the
alternative voice.
And so how do people
participate in it?
They go to a
globalblessingblog.com
and they register.
It's free, it doesn't
cost anything.
And the only thing is they have
to sign an agreement that they
will only post blessings.
So far have you had any
abuse in your postings
or has it all gone
really smoothly?
It's all gone really smoothly.
So people are
resonating with it.
Yeah.
And I'm so excited about it.
Because there are people
from all over the world
that are doing it.
And I just-- I believe that
there is power in the word.
And by using that
energy in a powerful way
we can shift consciousness.
We can indeed.
And when you're
talking about this
I'm being reminded
of other projects.
Other large projects as well,
like the Global Coherence
Project.
-Yes.
And what-- I think it's
really important to understand
is the power that you
talked about of the mind.
Where you start bringing groups
and numbers of people together
reinforcing each other.
It's not just that we have
an impact on-- impacting
ourselves in each other.
This has the potential
to impact land masses.
Yes.
We don't, I think,
understand as a species
that the emotional bodies
surrounding us, the mind of us,
is interpenetrated with
the mind of the planet.
And interpenetrating with
the mind of the cosmos.
We're all going through
this magnificent journey.
March toward 2012 when we
birth ourselves into a new era
together.
The earth is going through her
own stress points right now.
Absolutely.
And the more attention,
and love, and nurturing
that we bring, the easier
it is for the earth--
to have her-- transition in
a way that is supportive.
And that is not woo woo.
And in fact, Howard Martin
is working on setting
up sensors around the planet.
-I know.
Isn't that crazy?
It is.
And they're doing that
and they're saying,
yes-- they can see.
And they're fully expecting to
start seeing a pattern here.
That where people in
a given land mass area
change their emotions and
minds, and do this in harmony
with one another,
they're expecting
to see a reductiom--
not only in crime,
I mean that John
Hegland's work went
into all of that-- but
even Earth activity
in terms of along
fault lines and such.
That's how seriously
they're taking this project.
-It's all interconnected.
-Yes.
And that is a way
scientifically to show
us the impact of coherence.
Absolutely.
And as above so below.
And we don't have time
for that conversation
but it is very
much quite literal
what's happening in the cosmos.
Well it's this pressure
that the society at large
is feeling is very real.
And that means that the kind
of work you're talking about,
about cutting each other
a little bit of slack,
and being compassionate,
and showing
that really showing up for
one another is key right now.
Exactly.
Because that might be
the very thing we need.
We're going to need each other.
Any final comment?
We just have a few seconds left.
I want the people
looking at this program
to understand how
amazing they are.
And how necessary and essential.
And that there would
be a hole without them.
And that together
we can shift things.
There is light at the end
of the tunnel and it is us.
Absolutely.
And that is not New Age talk.
That happens to be
hard, cold, reality.
Or warm, soft, fuzzy, reality.
And I want to thank you
so much for being with us.
It's good to see you again.
It's good to see you too.
Thank you.
Beautiful.
If you'd like to participate
in Cynthia's global blessing
you can go to
globalblessingblog.com,
as she just said.
Meanwhile, Your
Extraordinary Essence
is a lovely workbook
to keep with you to go
through your journey with.
It's loaded with all
these little exercises
that we talked about.
And you're probably
going to find a couple
that really work for you.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on GAIAM TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]